---
layout: post
title: Install Vim 8 
---

## Why Vim?

Vim is a cross-platform text editor. It's a "learn-once-write-anywhere" solution.   
## How to Vim?

The hardest part of a "learn-once-write-anywhere" is "learn-once". Vim has a learning curve. If you want proof that it's worth the effort, see the vim 8 release thread.

The first part of any difficult learning curve is starting.

With the release of vim 8 I thought I'd try to make that first step a little easier.

Here's a refactor of how to install vim 8 on OSX based on their readme which is included in its entirety at the end of this post.

Make sure you have xcode CommandLineTools installed. If you have xcode installed on your machine, these will be installed. If not use `xcode-select --intall`.

Then clone the repo, change directories into `src` and run `make` then `sudo make install`.
 
```
git clone https://github.com/vim/vim.git
cd vim
cd src
make
sudo make install
```

This will install vim into your `/usr/local` directory, after which point you should test that your installation worked:

```
vim
```

You shold see something like
[vim.png](https://nsipplswezey.github.io/assets/vim.png)


Alternatively you can use homebrew to install the latest vim with, though their may some troubleshooting to do with linking.

```
brew install vim
```


## Source README

```
README_mac.txt for version 8.0 of Vim: Vi IMproved.

This file explains the installation of Vim on Macintosh systems.
See "README.txt" for general information about Vim.


To build from sources, like on Unix

1. Get the build tools: "clang" and "make".  These can be installed with the
   "CommandLineTools" package.   If you don't have one, do
	xcode-select --install
   Just like for any software development with OS X.

2. Get the source code.  Best is to use git (which you need to install first),
   see http://www.vim.org/git.php
   Or you can download and unpack the Unix tar archive, see
   http://www.vim.org/download.php

3. Go to the top directory of the source tree, do
	make
	sudo make install
  A newly built vim will be installed under "/usr/local".


If you can't manage to make this work, there is a fallback using Homebrew:

1. Install Homebrew from http://brew.sh/
2. Install latest Vim with:  brew install vim
```


## Closing

A week ago an engineer at a media company described his hiring experience as hazing. "Everyone goes through it. It binds the team. The team perpetuates it on future hires."

Last night another engineer used the same word to describe their most recent onsite. One side effect they noticed was that onsite stress somehow made the offer they received seem more valuable. The value was somehow linked to the effort put in. They commented that it reminded them of the experience they had of their 6-day-a-week 12-hour-a-day engineer program; the effort put in seemed linked to the value of the experience.

I sat there for a moment, quietly, and wondered.

