---
layout: post
title: Ritual of Algorithms 2
published: false
---

## Previous Post: [Ritual of Algorithms](https://nsipplswezey.github.io/2018/01/14/Algos.html)
## Next Post: [Ritual of Algorithms 3](https://nsipplswezey.github.io/2018/02/15/Algos-3.html) 

## The Ritual of Algorithms

Writing clearly about what I'm working on is a big personal value add. In organizing the work in some form that might make sense to an outside reader, I find my communication and understanding gets better, and can build reflexes for reducing complexity, focusing specifically, and verifying understanding. Additionally it can take a good day of coding that doesn't result in a commit, and turn it into tangible output. It amounts to a sort of daily micro-sprint reflection. It also serves as a back reference. After taking time off to work on other things, having a clear reference and linnear narrative can get me back into building. And I can look at my work from a third person perspective, and understand where I might improve, or where my surprises, bottle-necks or misunderstandings are. 

Additionally, I've learned that developing a consistent narrative structure that fits technical writing is useful in building a structure for my technical thinking. In previous technical blogging that structure has been "Goal", "Scope: What needs to be done?", and "Up and Running". Essentially this is motivation, action, and proof of result.

This series explores applying narrative structure to understanding, exploring and deepening practical experiences with reasoning through building and rebuilding data structures and algorithms. These posts intend to building quickly while reflecting and improving iteratively.

Our last post highlighted the importance of three pieces in the ritual of algorithms: Ask questions to discover constraints, try something once you think you have an understanding and maintain a relaxed perseverance.

## Goal?

The technical problem:

N light bulbs are connected by a wire. Each bulb has a switch associated with it, however due to faulty wiring, a switch also changes the state of all the bulbs to the right of current bulb. Given an initial state of all bulbs, find the minimum number of switches you have to press to turn on all the bulbs. You can press the same switch multiple times.

Note : 0 represents the bulb is off and 1 represents the bulb is on.

```
Example:

Input : [0 1 0 1]
Return : 4

Explanation :
	press switch 0 : [1 0 1 0]
	press switch 1 : [1 1 0 1]
	press switch 2 : [1 1 1 0]
	press switch 3 : [1 1 1 1]
```

This prompt is written funny. Let's ask some questions.

Each bulb has a switch. But then a switch changes the state of all bulbs to the right? Which switch? Do ALL switches also change the state of the bulb to their right? Yes. 

Oh. Ok.

What does "change the state" mean? What states do bulbs have? Just 0 and 1.

Ok... Good first questions. 

I've got a loose mental model, but the langauge is vague. Let's move to try something: work mentally through the example.

Start with `[0 1 0 1]` and then flip the switch at position `0` to turn on the bulb at zero, while also turning "on" bulbs off, and "off" bulbs on in all subsequent bulbs to the right.

After flipping the first switch, we get `[1 0 1 0]` where switch 0 flipped a 0 to a 1, but then the three remaining switches flipped from `[1 0 1]` to `[0 1 0]` resulting in a new state of bulbs `[1 0 1 0]`.

Alright. Start with `[0 1 0 1]` => press switch 0 => `[1 0 1 0]` => press switch 1 => `[1 1 0 1]` => press switch 2 => `[1 1 1 0]` => press switch 3 => `[1 1 1 1]`.

While writing this, I actually misinterpreted the example, but following `Relax and persevere` got me back on track. This is the ritual.

Ok. So it seems to me the best way to handle this is to start from the left, and check if a bulb is on. If it's on, leave it alone. And if it's off, turn it on, which subsequently flips the state of the elements to the left. 

My first inclination here is to write an algorithm that eats the board. Essentially after checking a bulb, we no care about the bulb, and instead only care about subsequent bulb states.

To me there are two cases then. If the current bulb is on, leave it, and somehow get our hands on the remaining bulbs. If the bulb is off, add one to our tally, and somehow get our hands on the remaining bulbs with their states flipped!

Let's deal with the simpler of those two cases; a helper function that just returns a smaller board. I noticed that I started thinking about the bulbs as a sort of game board. Probably could be clearer, but that's ok.

```
        def cutOldBoard(arr):
            arr.pop(0)
            return arr
```

That seems reasonable. And how about flipping the state of a board? `0 + 1 % 2 = 1` and `1 + 1 % 2 = 0`. I quick googled that one, which probably isn't ideal since there's no googling in a typical whiteboard session. In context, I'd probably ask "is there a provided helper function for flipping 0s and 1s in any given array?" And the answer would probably be "no." Hah.

```
            # flip em
            for index, bulb in enumerate(arr):
                arr[index] = (arr[index] + 1) % 2
```

Which means our full helper looks like:

```
        def createNewBoard(arr):
            
            # flip em
            for index, bulb in enumerate(arr):
                arr[index] = (arr[index] + 1) % 2
                
            # pop first element 
            arr.pop(0)
            return arr
```

Let's also write a helper that adds the index of the bulb that needs to be turned on to a result array. And then at the end of our solution function, lets return the length of that array. The whole function body is provided for context.

```
class Solution:
    # @param A : list of integers
    # @return an integer
    def bulbs(self, A):
        result = []
        
        def addToResult(index):
            result.append(index)
            
        ...
        
        return len(result)
```

Now that we have our helpers, let's work through our array.

Then my initial approach was to use simple iteration. Copy the intial board, iterate through it, and on each step, redefine the board for the next iteration. This appears to fail, because each successive iteration seems to be based on the initial value of nextBulbs, and doesn't actually appear to run off the update `nextBulbs`.

```
        nextBulbs = A[:]
        for index, bulb in enumerate(nextBulbs):
            print(nextBulbs)
            print(bulb)
            
            if bulb == 1:
                nextBulbs = cutOldBoard(nextBulbs)
            else:
                addToResult(index)
                nextBulbs = createNewBoard(nextBulbs)
```

This is the moment where "try something" transitions to `relax and persevere`. And also where I'm starting to have another insight.

Until you've memorized/internalized and operate with perfect recall of all syntactic quirks of a coding language under time pressure, you are absolutely going to write buggy code. It's just going to happen. And this turns out to just be a surprising part of the ritual of algorithms and data structures. 

Write bugs. Fix them thoughtfully.

There's also a subtle corolary here, which is that in the interest of keeping things simple, you might want to pick one language for your algorithms because you'll likely have an easier time keeping the quirks of one language in mind, and therfor insert fewer bugs into your code. Even though I've build things with multiple languages, I've chose python as my common denominator algorithms language, though I'm still getting used to all of its pieces.

This for loop runs only once. I haven't gotten to the bottom of exactly why this is the case basides that it appears reassignment of the target variable for iteration, interupts the iteration. What matters is that it doesn't work. Let's fix this bug thoughtfully. There's a better control flow structure for operating on progressively shrinking data.

That's a while loop, which reevaluates its condition on every iteration.

```
        while(len(nextBulbs) > 0):
            currentBulb = nextBulbs[0]
            
            if currentBulb == 1:
                nextBulbs = cutOldBoard(nextBulbs)
            else:
                addToResult(1)
                nextBulbs = createNewBoard(nextBulbs)
```

And this works.

### Up and Running


Our full solution comes out to be:

```
class Solution:
    # @param A : list of integers
    # @return an integer
    def bulbs(self, A):
        
        result = []
        
        def addToResult(index):
            result.append(index)
            
        def createNewBoard(arr):
            
            # flip em
            for index, bulb in enumerate(arr):
                arr[index] = (arr[index] + 1) % 2
                
            # pop off 
            arr.pop(0)
            return arr
        
        def cutOldBoard(arr):
            arr.pop(0)
            return arr
        
        nextBulbs = A[:]
        
        while(len(nextBulbs) > 0):
            currentBulb = nextBulbs[0]
            
            if currentBulb == 1:
                nextBulbs = cutOldBoard(nextBulbs)
            else:
                addToResult(1)
                nextBulbs = createNewBoard(nextBulbs)
        
        return len(result)
```

One thing I notice in both these posts, is that the `while` loop addressed issues where my recursive and iterative control flow failed. When I think about it, something about that makes sense. It seems that between a `for` loop, recursion and a `while` loop, the `while` offers flexibility in control flow that the others haven't.

Based on these posts, I'm adding an insight section to these posts, where I'll jot down the practices that seem to emerge as important to the algos and data structures ritual.



## Insights

The significant insight from this exercise is:

Write bugs. Fix them thoughtfully.

Past insights:

Ask questions. Reasoning through constraints is always part of the problem.

Try something. When you've updated your mental model, give it another try.

Don't freak out. Relax and persevere. You're going to make mistakes in your first implementation. Keep going.

## Optimized Solution

I'm also adding an optimized solution section as well. 

While it seems like there's an aspiration for optimized solutions, I'm noticing that most of the value of the ritual is searching the space of the problem. When interviewers say it's more about "how you think" it seems that's what they mean.

Having said that, optimized solutions are a great way to think more fundamentally about the problem. Optimized solutions I've seen so far seem to involve some nice trick of logical insight into the problem, that often underlies the reasoning in a more clear or straightforward –but less space or time efficient– solution.

It turns out that you can reason about the whole remaining array with a simple 0 or 1.

If you've turned on a switch, the state flip of the remaining elements can actually just be held in a single value(instead of tracking the whole remaining array).

State starts `state - 0` and then is upded when `ele == state` to `state = 1 - state`.

```
        state = ans = 0
        
        for i, ele in enumerate(A):
            if ele == state:
                ans+=1
                state = 1 - state
```

From there, you can compare your next element to the current state.

Run the following example through the optimized algorithm yourself:

```
[0 1 0 1] # element[0] = 0 = state = 0; increment; state = 1 - 0 = 0

[1 0 1 0] # element[1] = 0 = state = 0; increment; state = 1 - 0 = 0

[1 1 0 1] # element[2] = 0 = state = 0; increment; state = 1 - 0 = 0

[1 1 1 0] # element[3] = 0 = state = 0; increment; state = 1 - 0 = 0

[1 1 1 1] # result is 4
```

```
class Solution:
    # @param A : list of integers
    # @return an integer
    def bulbs(self, A):
        
        state = ans = 0
        
        for i, ele in enumerate(A):
            if ele == state:
                ans+=1
                state = 1 - state
        
        return ans
```

This doesn't strike me personally as naturally intuitive, but it does make sense at some elegant level.


## Other Notes For Reference

Copy and array
```
copy = A[:]
```

Pythonic way of iterating through a collection and index using `enumerate`
```
for index, bulb in enumerate(arr):
```

Turns out you can mutate an array –say by using `del`or `append`– through which you are iterating(but not reassign)
```
loopcount = 3
r = range(1, loopcount)
for i in r:
    somestring = '7'
    newcount = int(somestring)
    del r[newcount:]

for task in tasklist:
    newtask = do(task)
    if newtask:
        tasklist.append(newtask)
```

Python uses `elif`
```
if expression1:
   statement(s)
elif expression2:
   statement(s)
elif expression3:
   statement(s)
else:
   statement(s)
```

`.pop` and `.append`

```
arr = [1, 2, 3] 
arr.pop(0)
# arr = [2,3]

arr.append(4)
# arr = [2,3,4]
```

Use `pass` for noop
```
if(condition):
    pass
else(condition):
    statements
```


## Reference Links

`pass`

## **Thanks** 

Lawrence Stiers [@tandcsurf](https://github.com/tandcsurf) for comments and feedback on this post.

[comment]: # (Lawrence Stiers [@tandcsurf](https://github.com/tandcsurf) and [@christopher-hague](https://github.com/christopher-hague) for comments and feedback on this post.)


